[Music]
flight 503 has been canceled we
apologize for the inconvenience then
might come as a shocker when you're
sitting in the departure lounge looking
at the gorgeous bright sunny weather
outside if there's not a rain cloud or
snow storm in sight then what gives oh
yeah planes can't fly in extreme heat in
the summer of 2017 50 flights were
canceled plus seven that were only
delayed at Phoenix Sky Harbor
International Airport
the reason temperatures were a
brain-melting 120 degrees Fahrenheit
truth be told that crazy Arizona Heat
didn't affect larger planes like Boeing
747s or Airbus a320s which can still
take off even when it's 126 degrees out
yet in the age of super advanced
technology it seems weird that air
travel can be interrupted by an
unusually hot day the reason why smaller
jets like Bombardier s-- can't take the
heat when it goes over 118 is actually
in the nature of flight itself before
every departure pilots get detailed
information on the air temperature
humidity elevation runway lengths and
other important things the system
processes this data to calculate optimum
takeoff speed thrust and so on however
it's impossible to calculate that data
beyond certain limits
one of such limits is an extremely hot
temperature now to understand that you
need to know what makes planes fly in
the first place spoiler alert it's not
magical fairy dust it's the ability to
generate enough lift if there's no lift
a plane won't be able to take off and
stay up in the air so where does this
lift come from it all has to do with
wings and how they're designed to
redirect the movement of air the wings
collide with air particles and push them
down but those stubborn little air
molecules resist that force redirection
and go right back up since the air
particles are resisting that change the
pressure on the underside of the
becomes higher over the top of the wing
the pressure remains low this difference
in pressure creates the lift and it
pushes the plane into the sky for the
plane to stay aloft it's crucial that
the pressure under the wing remains high
when the conditions are right there
should be no problem not only creating
lift but also maintaining it when
something isn't right in that formula a
plane will hardly take off you would
think that heat or humidity is directly
to blame here but it's more about air
density the atmosphere gets thinner the
higher up you go here thinner simply
means that the air molecules are further
apart from each other if you don't have
as many air molecules pushing up on the
wing it becomes harder for the plane to
generate enough left now you can
appreciate those engines that much more
they work hard to keep the plane in the
air and you moving from A to B ok so
what about all this talk of planes can't
fly in extreme heat well hot weather has
the same effect on air as higher
altitudes do that is the higher the
temperature the less dense the air is
the wings then have almost nothing to
push and produce lift from in this case
the plane would need to move much faster
to be able to get that lift it needs to
take off the problem with that is you
only have so much runway to work with to
minimize the risk of that dangerous
situation happening the plane needs more
of everything than it takes in normal
conditions more engine power more thrust
larger wings more speed and a longer
runway because the planes climb
performance is so much lower it can only
lift a smaller number of passengers in
cargo the temperature outside airport
elevation and runway length are the
three factors that affect how reduced
this amount will be for some planes
mostly smaller once it gets to the point
where it not only has to be reduced but
the flight must be rescheduled because
it would be too dangerous for it to even
try to take off
lower air density is the main problem in
extremely hot weather but it's not the
only one aircraft components like
onboard electronics overheat seals can
get too soft or melt brake temperatures
increase during landings there can be
cabin cooling issues a lot of things can
break down in crazy hot temperatures and
don't forget that it takes people to
service the aircraft and the airport
many of them work outside and the heat
affects them directly making working
conditions unbearable Phoenix Sky Harbor
is of course not the only Airport where
high temperatures have messed up the
schedule in passengers plans in 2013
during a heatwave in the UK many
travelers had to be bumped from their
booked flights to make the planes
burdens easier it happened at London
City Airport where the runways are
shorter than at other nearby airports
leaving a few passengers on the ground
is one of the possible solutions when
the plane just has to take off no matter
how hot it is reducing cargo or flying
with a less than full fuel tank they can
always refuel somewhere cooler later are
other possible options in some places
around the world the heat isn't a
temporary inconvenience but a permanent
situation people have to work with the
Middle East for example is home to one
of the most important transportation
hubs in the world Dubai International
Airport many flights going to and from
this and other Gulf airports are
scheduled for night and early morning
when it gets somewhat cooler local
carriers also normally work with larger
planes that can withstand the high
temperatures it's not clear why some
aircraft can't take off in crazy heat
but what about the cold is there such a
thing as too cold to fly well if
anything aircraft prefer when it's
chilly after all they're designed to
cruise at 35,000 feet and such altitudes
are known for their teeth chattering
temperatures of around minus 60 degrees
so technically extreme cold isn't an
issue in the air
but it can make the ground preparation
for the flight longer and more
complicated you have to de-ice the
runway and even the plane itself and
when it passes the point of too cold for
aviation the refuelling equipment can
just freeze hmm looks like airplanes
have their limits too hey that reminds
me do you prefer the cold the heat or
somewhere in between let me know down in
the comments anyway as we continue to
explore the limitations of aviation
nowadays I can't help but wonder if it
can ever be too windy to fly going
through a storm can be a scary
experience for passengers but is it
really as dangerous as it seems well it
depends a plane is unlikely to start
wigging out just because it's going
through some turbulence aviation
engineers and manufacturers test their
aircraft and specify limits for the
ground air and cross speeds that way
pilots know exactly how they should move
in different weather conditions however
the most critical and possibly
unpredictable moments during gales are
takeoffs and landings at some airports
the winds are quite severe all year
round so landing can get too wobbly for
comfort it's risky alright and it
requires a real pro of a pilot to land
during a wing strike that's when the
wing hits the runway
it can happen when the wind unexpectedly
changes speed and direction something
that's called a wind shear and a pilot
must know what they're doing to land
when a headwind turns into a tailwind
for example a lot depends on a pilot
skills when it seems to be too wet to
fly as well
heavy rain is mostly a problem when it
comes to landing runways are designed in
such a way so that water doesn't remain
standing on them however if that happens
pilots have to adjust landing speed and
distance depending on how much water is
on the ground
hydroplaning is the riskiest situation
that can happen in wet weather
you see if enough water gets between the
planes tire and the runway it'll reduce
the friction needed there to bring the
aircraft to a stop then the pilot has to
with skidding if you thought it's
difficult enough in your car imagine
losing control of a jumbo jet
fortunately such cases are rare and who
knows maybe in the future airplanes will
be able to safely take off fly and land
an extreme heat called wind and rain
granted we still have to bow down to the
laws of physics but I'm sure aviation
engineers are hard at work making
improvements and innovations I'm still
waiting for teleportation to come around
so that I don't have to deal with
another canceled or delayed flight ever
again for now I'll just keep dreaming
hey if you learn something new today
then give the video a like and share
with a friend and here are some other
cool videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and remember
stay on the bright side of life
[Music]